Once around 82 Eridani.
So 82 Eidani is a fairly faint star in
the constellation of Erodanis, the
river, the long sineuous line of fairly
faint stars that wends its way up from
the southern part of the sky into the
northern hemisphere.
And the location of this particular star
is marked by the red ring that I've
drawn there down towards the southern
end of it. It's one of the nearest
sunlike stars that we know. We see it as
magnitude 4.3 and that's because it's
fairly close by at a distance of just
under 20 light years. So, one of the
sun's near neighbors.
It's a main sequence star burning
hydrogen to helium on the normal part of
the Herzbrung Russell diagram there. And
a G6 class. So that's slightly cooler
than the sun and as such slightly less
bright.
79% of the mass. A small reduction in
the mass tends to create a larger drop
in the overall brightness. the
temperature goes down and the radius
goes down. So the surface area is less.
So the total light output for a 80% soul
mass star is about 70% of the power
output. And when we look at the
spectrum, it is somewhat metal
deficient. Now astronomers love to call
anything heavier than helium a metal.
And so this includes carbon, nitrogen,
and oxygen that chemists would call
non-metals.
But that's what we're talking about
here. So the heavier elements are
somewhat depleted compared to the sun.
And that goes with its age. It's a bit
older at 5.8 billion years old rather
than about 4.6.
So that puts it in the population 2
group of stars that were formed when
there were fewer of these heavy metals,
heavy elements around.
Now we have three categories.
Populations one, two and three. Let me
just explain a little bit about them.
Population one, those are in fact the
modern era stars. So this is another
example of where the categorization is
backwards. The newer ones are the lower
number, population one. The middle-aged
ones, population two, older stars in the
galaxy, in the bulge or in globular
clusters in fact. And then population
three, the very oldest stars. And it
must be said these remain hypothetical
at the time of writing, although I
expect James Webb will change that very
soon and we will know more about them.
So the population three going through
these in reverse uh order from the
oldest. These are formed in the very
early universe after the big bang when
the only elements that were around were
essentially hydrogen and helium with a
smattering of lithium and little bit of
dutyium but nothing heavier than that.
And so these are somewhat different in
their behavior. They are forced to use
the hydrogen [snorts] to helium proton
chain fusion method. there's no carbon
around so they can't use the CNO cycle
and this changes the uh way that they
run through their lives in theory. Be
wonderful if we can actually catch this
in action. And maybe this Spitzer Space
Telescope infrared image is showing the
glow from population three stars in the
background there. We're not absolutely
certain of that. This is one of the
things that uh is an area of active
research.
Middle-aged stars, the population two,
these probably originated
in fact in a now merged galaxy dia
Enceladus. And if you want to read more
about that or listen to my video about
the archaeology of the Milky Way and the
history of formation of it, um I will
try and put a link to that in the
comments.
So these are poorer in the heavier
elements and mostly they contain only
the alpha elements. What do I mean by
alpha elements? I mean those that are
made with an even number of protons.
Essentially
stars turn hydrogen into helium and then
the next stage is to fuse heliums
together. And heliums are two protons
and two neutrons. So the products tend
to be uh 2, four, six, eight um and so
on numbers of the uh protons with
corresponding numbers of neutrons rather
than any of the oddnumbered elements.
You do get a few because side reactions
occur, but they're dominated by these
alpha elements that are made in the
alpha absorption chain as you keep
sticking more helium nuclei alpha
particles together.
And so these were formed in previous
generations of giant stars that exploded
as type two supernovi when the core
collapses scatters all of the contents
to the uh cosmos for them to cool and
recolapse as new stars. And type two
supernovi and the cores of these giant
stars are laden with the alpha elements.
And so we see a lot of them.
Population one, the new stars have the
highest proportion of the heavier
elements and they also contain a full
range of elements including the
oddnumbered ones and many of the very
heavy ones that are formed in the even
more powerful type 1A supernovi where
white dwarfs explode.
Now the reason for that is that white
dwarfs are the product of small stars
that subsequently turn into white dwarfs
and then
acquire too much mass and explode as
type 1A supernovi. So they can only
happen once type uh once white dwarfs
have formed and they form at the end of
smaller stars lives and smaller stars
lives are very long and so this doesn't
happen in the early universe. There are
very few type 1A supernovi to be found
in the very ancient world because there
just hasn't been time for small stars to
go through their life cycle and create
the white dwarfs that subsequently can
explode. And the sun is actually one of
the oldest of the classification
population one. It's almost on the the
cusp between one and two at 4.6 six
billion years old.
So, back to Eric Dani 82, a high
velocity star. It's actually moving very
much faster than the average star in its
part of the galaxy. It's doing 101
kilometers per second relative to uh
Soul. That's pretty fast.
And it's plowing through the
interstellar medium at three times the
local speed of sound, creating an
interstellar shock wave, a bow shock.
And you can see the photograph of 82
Eerodani with its bow shock at the top
there. And this marries up with the idea
that it is part of the population two
stars. These high velocity stars
and the population two stars seem to be
uh correlated. They are the older stars
which orbit around somewhat outside the
galactic plane. And again, this points
back to that galactic merger story and
an origin in
one of the older galaxies that merged
together to form our current Milky Way.
82 Aerodidani is also interesting in
that we detected a dust disc around it
using the IRAS telescope, an infrared
telescope of the 1990s. And this dust
disc is quite tremendous. It goes out to
24 astronomical units, 24 times the
Earth's sun distance, almost the 30 AU
that would be the size of Neptune's
orbit.
So where we find dust discs, we expect
to find families of planets and uh so
the hunt for planets around 82 Eidani is
on. There have been numerous reports and
following that subsequent retractions of
planets with this. I'm not going to bore
you by listing them all. There have been
so many uh just one in particular that's
of interest really and this is a common
theme across this star and many others.
It had a period reported of 40 days but
it turned out that 40 days was actually
the rotation period of the star itself
and that we are looking nearly pole on
at the star. That makes trying to look
for transits impossible. If the planets
are orbiting around the equatorial plane
of the star, they're not going to pass
in front of it. And it also interferes
with our attempts to use the radial
velocity method to look for wobbles in
the star towards and away from us. If
the planets are going around its
equator, which is essentially a face on
orbit from our point of view, just not
going to see it. And so these stars are
problematic. But occasionally we find
with this star and with many others that
the rotation period of the star itself
can masquerade as a signal from the um
rotation of a planet in its orbit around
it.
So those have all been discounted. But
we do now have confirmed reports of
three planets. two super Earths
named B and C lowerase for planets
and these are double the mass of the
Earth orbiting around the star one in an
18.3day
orbit the other one in just under 90
days 89.6 six. And then there is a third
planet D which is orbiting in [snorts]
an orbit of 647 days. So almost 2 years
and that's a larger
mass planet with about 6.6 times the
Earth's mass. So a pretty big rocky
super Earth or possibly a mini Neptune.
We're not entirely sure. And that's the
one I wanted to follow up on really here
because when we think about the star
itself, a little bit cooler than the
sun, 5,473
Kelvin, that's about 400 less than Saul
and smaller in radius, so a lower
surface area. The total heat coming from
it is less. And so the habitable zone,
the green zone where liquid water might
exist at uh planetary surfaces is closer
in. We are at 1 AU, one Earth's sun
distance obviously and slap in the
center of the sun's habitable zone.
Venus is 0.7 and really is on the inner
edge if not inside the too hot zone. And
Mars at 1.6 six is right on the outside
edge of the uh habitable zone. Perhaps a
bit too cold. So here that habitable
zone's a little bit closer and Mars
would definitely be outside it, but
Venus would be just within it.
And what we find with planet D is
something rather curious. It's in a very
eccentric orbit. This is not totally
unheard of for extra solar planets, but
in this particular case, it causes it to
dive through the habitable zone, swing
past the inner edge of that, back out
through it, and go out into the cold.
So, it's sweeping in and out, going from
3/4 of an AU, 75, so on the inner edge
of the habitable zone, out to 2 AU,
which is out in the cold beyond it. And
this has been determined by a couple of
different instruments. The VLT in Chile
using the Espresso. You've got to have a
good acronym. The SEL spectrometer for
rocky exoplanets and stable
spectroscopic observations.
That's quite a mouthful, isn't it? And
the HARPS instrument, which is the high
resolution radial velocity phototric
system on the European Space Ay's 3.6
meter telescope in Chile. that's been
used to back it up. So, we're fairly
confident about this.
And the result of this long elliptical
orbit diving through the habitable zone
is that it spends about half of its time
in the
temperate part of the habitable zone,
but the seasons are pretty extreme. It
must get a little bit toasty on the
inner edge and then swing back out to
the outer side where the distance varies
by a factor of 3 to 8 between the inner
edge and the outer edge. And if you
calculate how much heat it therefore
receives that drops according to the
square of the ratio. So 3 squ is 9, 8
squar is 64. That's around a 1:7 ratio
in the heat received depending on which
part of the orbit the planet is in.
That's a quite severe swing. And we can
calculate what that will do to the
likely temperature. The temperature
obeys the Stefan Boltzman relationship
which I've talked about in a number of
my videos which is actually such that
the temperature is the fourth power of
the
uh sorry the temperature to the fourth
power relates to the heat received. So
we have to take the fourth root of the
9-64 ratio and I've done that and it
works out at 0.61.
So, the temperature will be 60% of its
hottest when it's at its coldest. And
remember, that's not relative to 0
degrees in ordinary human Fahrenheit or
centigrade. That's relative to zero
absolute. So, we are at about 300
Kelvin. And the that would be the normal
habitable temperature. This is going to
drop from perhaps 400 Kelvin on the
inside to 60% of that. So 240 Kelvin at
the extreme outer edge um and be
considerably colder and certainly freeze
up any uh existing water vapor. So hot
house conditions rather Venuslike for a
few months as it swings through on the
inner part of its orbit. 50% of the
time, probably fairly Earthlike
conditions, and then out into the deep
freeze. And you can just imagine what
that would do if this planet had uh
living creatures on it. You can imagine
periods of extreme heat, periods of
barmy conditions, and then periods where
the best thing to do was to hibernate.
Uh, as uh we find in the case of
creatures like bears that live in the
Arctic and so forth. Uh, they will just
hunker down to get away from those
freezing temperatures and then come out
again. Quite how they cope with the
summer. Maybe they all go into the
ocean. I don't know. be fascinating to
be able to find out.
So that's the story of 82 Aridani and
its interesting
planet planet D. Thanks very much for
listening and I'll see you on the next
one.